---
layout: post
title: "Rediscovering the Joy of Public Libraries"
date: 2019-07-08
summary: It's quite hard to focus these days.
---

*This piece was originally posted on my
[Medium](https://medium.com/swlh/rediscovering-the-joy-of-public-libraries-df554923e3d2).*

![bookshelf-wall](/assets/images/bookshelf-wall.jpg)
<sub>Photo by [Alfons
Morales](https://unsplash.com/@alfonsmc10?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/search/photos/library?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)</sub>

It's quite hard to focus these days. Clarification: it's quite hard to focus
when you're like me and dedicate the lion's share of your waking hours to
browsing the internet. Surely it's not just me --- the average American spends
[6.3 hours a day interacting with digital
media](https://www.bondcap.com/report/itr19/).

Truth be told, I *love* the internet.

It's this wonderfully weird place that shrinks the gap between human will and
human achievement. My favorite Reddit posts are the ones that recruit the
collective effort of the internet to some delightful end, like [this
one](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/photographer-elated-finally-find-couple-viral-yosemite-proposal-photo-n925731).
My buddy and I figured out how to flush the transmission fluid in my old Subaru
from a YouTube video. I've met friends and lovers on the internet. There's more
to be said of the internet's vast beneficence to humanity, but that's for
another post.

I mentioned having trouble focusing: these days, I find it brutally difficult
to sit down and work on a single task, moreso when that task is self-imposed,
like writing. I think a great deal of this incessant mental fickleness has to
do not with my behavior when focusing, but rather when *idling*.

I am a prolific purchaser of gadgets, most of which are internet-enabled, and
thus, when I'm bored, I have a multitude of digital stimulants available to
numb my thoughts, like a depressed man who happens to own a liquor store.

Then, when the time comes, I put aside my devices to focus on writing, but,
wholly drained of subconscious cognitive inspiration, I find myself at a
scatter-brained standstill. The seemingly obvious remedy then is to find
inspiration on the internet! and well, we know where that goes.

This was about the time I decided to visit my local public library.

<br />

Non-automatic glass doors. The aroma of woody vanilla and musty carpets. Books
on shelves, books in carts, books on laps, books in hearts --- I felt like a
prodigal son, hesitantly returning to an eagerly waiting father.

I selected a window-side cubby, sat down, and just, wrote. To do anything
besides write or read felt sacrilegious in the presence of such daunting
volumes of literature.

When it came time for a break, I perused the shelves, immersing myself in their
oaky embrace. Each title was an invitation to explore, a front-row seat to the
musings of another mind. I wound up leaving with three new paragraphs, a visual
primer on local architecture, and a thick little collection of critique on
American literature.

<br />

For all its encyclopedic breadth, the internet is utterly unserendipitous. It's
engineered, algorithm-driven, explainable. It's also ludicrously cluttered,
often by fiscal motives. A "random" discovery on the internet is never actually
random --- it's a click-driven traversal through well-calculated paths.

![internet-discovery-path](/assets/images/internet-discovery-path.png)

It's a paradoxical conundrum to be surrounded by millions of creations and feel
no desire to create --- something Jak Wilmot learned after a [week in
VR](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGRY14znFxY). Contrast browsing the pages
of the internet to browsing the shelves of the library, where your experiences
are bound not by attention-span limits and monetization but only the laws of
physics and the Dewey Decimal system.

To stand amongst shelves, to physically surround yourself with options and
ponder them, to pull a book from its resting place and stir it into
animation --- these are *active* functions of reason, not *passive* submissions
to algorithmic suggestions. A "random" discovery in the library can be as
simple as finding a misplaced book on a cart to taking the suggestion of a
passerby returning her books --- serendipitous indeed.

![library-discovery-path](/assets/images/library-discovery-path.png)

Feeling uninspired? Struggling to focus? It might be time to go back to where
it all started --- the local public library.
