---
layout: post
title: "The Perfect Pen"
date: 2019-05-20
summary: We all use pens.
tags: []
---
We all use pens. Chances are, if you're reading this, you've got a pen nearby,
because you're probably (in some capacity) a writer. But pens aren't only for
the writers of the world--pens are for students, teachers, mothers, cashiers,
lawyers, waiters. Pens are for everyone, but not everyone is for pens.

In the modern world, we have degraded our once-mighty swords of script down to
the disposable level. We mass-produce our pens, selling them in
egregiously-large multi-packs that just *scream* "I'm replaceable". We garishly
brand our pens with company logos, handing them out at conferences, forcing
them to live short, underappreciated lives. We also gaudily overdo them,
turning them into gilded, weighty status symbols to be emphatically placed down
next to signature lines.

In the midst of all this misguided multiplicity, however, there stands one pen
to redeem pen-kind--a writing instrument with dignity, purpose, character. A
ballpoint beauty with soul, designed with the writer in mind: the Pilot G2.
![pilot-g2](/assets/images/pilot-g2.png){:class="img-responsive"}

To refresh your memory, the Pilot G2 is a gel-based ballpoint pen with a
transparent body, tight rubber grip, and clicky top. It comes in a variety of
point sizes to suit the discerning penman: 1.0mm, 0.7mm, 0.5mm, and 0.38mm. I'm
a personal fan of the 0.38mm, the *ultra-fine*: sharper lines, quicker-drying
ink, and an extra significant digit to remind me just how *special* this pen is.

And boy, is it special. Back in elementary, where clout was measured by the
contents of your pencil pouch, the G2 was just about the best thing you could
have: a satisfyingly clicky pen that wrote like a dream. Plus, when you were
bored, you could practice your budding engineering skills by disassembling and
reassembling it, even turning it into a spring-loaded cap-shooter if you were
*really* astute.

Unlike snobbish luxury pens, the Pilot G2 is affordable, and unlike silly
imported pens (*cough, MUJI, cough*), it's accessible - nearly every store's
stationery section has got them. For the environmentally conscious user, the
ink cartridges are replaceable. There are small versions of the pen for travel,
mechanical pencil versions for erasability, even fashion-printed ones for
groove. The Pilot G2 is like the plain white tee of pens--for the *everyman*.

For a while, I forgot about the Pilot G2. I appreciated using one whenever I
could, but I didn't actively seek them out. I bounced from pen to pen without
care--after all, it is *just a pen*, right? Surely it's not about the vessel
that delivers the ink so much as the actual content of the writing, whatever
that may be. I seemed to implicitly believe that for a while, and thus, the
contents of my pencil pouch were consistently transient, the ink lines on my
pages forever fluctuating in thickness, shade, and hue. I'd gladly accept
trashy company swag pens, thinking "Hey, I'll probably lose it soon anyways" or
"If it breaks, I'll just find another". But something wasn't quite right.

Writing is sacred. It's a deeply personal practice borne of genuine intention.
When we use shitty pens, we deny our writing its rightful dignity. It's a
mindless action for an incredibly mindful activity. I finally realized this a
few months ago, and when I decided to make a change, I knew exactly the pen for
the job.

My pen's got soul. My pen writes beautifully. And most importantly, my pen
reminds me that writing is sacred.

P.S. *not* sponsored by Pilot

--

This article was originally posted on [Medium](https://medium.com/swlh/the-perfect-pen-b6aa4a66827f).
