---
layout: post
title: "When Ignorance Isn't Bliss"
date: 2019-06-02
summary: We hear the phrase “Ignorance is Bliss” thrown around a lot these days. 
---

*This piece was originally published on my
[Medium](https://medium.com/@thisisnathan/when-ignorance-isnt-bliss-eade7cd648a1).*

We hear the phrase "Ignorance is Bliss" thrown around a lot these days.
Inundated with headlines, tweets, advertisements, and articles, the modern
human has to constantly deal with an egregious amount of information.
Naturally, when we're feeling overwhelmed, we seek comfort. "Ignorance is
Bliss" offers a pleasant escape from the discomfort of difficult truths.

I fried up a couple of eggs for breakfast the other day. I nearly dropped the
bottle of olive oil as I held it over the pan; the damn thing was greased up
like a sunbathing grandpa's shiny backside. As I wiped down the bottle, I
glanced at the nutrition label and thought *damn, that's a whole lot of
calories*. I turned to my roommate and told him: "Dude, you would not believe
how many calories are in this bottle of olive oil!". He put his hands up, shook
his head twice, and told me he refused to check nutrition labels because
"Ignorance is Bliss". Mind you, this is a roommate with whom I exercise
regularly, someone who prioritizes health and fitness.

![eggs-oil](/assets/images/eggs-oil.png)

I do still love my olive oil.

What he said got me thinking --- is that really how the phrase works? Perhaps
further inspection is warranted here.

<br />

Let's define truth as a fact about the world. This could be as simple as which
day of the week today is. Ignorance, then, would be a state in which you are
unaware of a given truth. Bliss is happiness (let's keep it simple).

Practically speaking, we tend to use this phrase with respect to truths that
are *uncomfortable* to accept --- things that might make us unhappy. "Ignorance
is Bliss" would then mean that when we are unaware of discomforting truths,
they cannot make us unhappy. It's not that unawareness fills us with happiness;
rather, it simply shields us from *unhappiness*.

Surely there are tons of truths that we are blissfully unaware of at any given
moment. My leftover spinach could be spoiled. My neighbor could be a secret
agent. My ex could be with someone else. I haven't got a clue, and it doesn't
matter, because my present happiness is shielded by my ignorance of these
truths. This "shielding effect" is pretty easy to grasp and hard to
deny --- how could you possibly be let down by things you don't know about? We
sometimes even use this maxim in our dealings with others --- parents hide
unsettling truths from children, bosses withhold information from employees,
friends guard secrets from each other --- all usually with good intentions.

![unawareness-shield](/assets/images/unawareness-shield.png)

But what happens when we hide truths from *ourselves*?

By extension, we imagine that we're shielding ourselves in the same way we do
others, protecting our fragile happiness from the unsettling reality of
discomforting truths. Try as we might, this doesn't work --- allow me to
illustrate with an example, then attempt to establish with a concept.

Nowadays, an exorbitant amount of Americans are accumulating or repaying
student loan debt. Debt is a cold type of subjugation --- one in which the
slave-master need not employ daily cruelties to enforce their ownership; no,
ownership is unquestionable, the debts already accrued.

Debt is uncomfortable to think about. Nobody wants to be constantly reminded of
the anvil hovering above their head every time they buy a latte. So when it
comes to debt, we ignore the truth, desperately attempting to force the thought
to the other side of the unawareness shield. We've got such desperate faith in
the unawareness shield, too, like a kid at an arcade claw machine channeling
every ounce of willpower into his fingertips as he pushes the engage button.

But it rarely works. Maybe for a short time, just long enough to get us through
the moment, but the truth lingers, and as long as it lingers, it affects us. As
we're well aware, student loan debt won't disappear just because it isn't being
acknowledged--- frankly, it'll just get worse.

The issue is that ignoring is not the same as ignorance. Ignoring is an
*action*; ignorance is a *state*. By definition, when we ignore something, we
acknowledge its existence --- how can you ignore that which you can't identify?

<br />

My roommate and I started tracking our calories together. We both sort of
realized that it was something we had to do to get where we wanted to be, even
if it meant confronting some of our long-time eating habits. As long as we hid
from the truth, we knew we'd be stuck in the same place.

Honestly, I think we're all already aware of this on some level. Nobody ever
needed a Medium article to teach them how to live --- that's the job of
experience and reflection. Still, we're infinitely forgetful, so every now and
then, it helps to be reminded. Hopefully this piece does just that.

*"where ignorance is bliss, 'Tis folly to be wise." - Thomas Gray*
